There's an emotional cycle that I'm sure most of you folks in this room can relate to. I call it the five stages of shiny. First, there's desire. You see the latest new gadget. Maybe it's an Apple Vision Pro headset, or a smartwatch, or a graphics card, or even a piece of software. Maybe it promises to properly solve a problem that's been bothering you, or maybe you just want it because it's really really shiny and you NEED it or you'll never be happy.

Then, there's acquisition. Maybe you get one as a gift, maybe you go out and buy one. Either way: it's yours. Then comes the unboxing... you unpack it, you plug it in, you fire it up for the first time... you know that feeling, right? "Hey, I wonder what I can make it DO?"

Then there's that first tiny microcosm of doubt... hang on, the website said my smartwatch could play MP3s... but did that screen say something about a subscription? The salesperson promised that we could deploy custom workflows from GitHub but you can't see anywhere to configure that... 

And then there's the moment of truth. The moment where you realise that your new gadget doesn't *quite* do what you want... but it could. It's got all the right bits, they're just not quite configured the way you want them. You just need to hack it a bit.

Sometimes, this is the start of a beautiful, creative synergy between human and machine. All you folks out there who have your IDE set up just the way you like it - your shell, your fonts, your colour schemes, your plugins... you know what I'm talking about here. I think this cycle is one of the defining characteristics of a true hacker - and I don't mean the mainstream definition of somebody who breaks into bank computers, I mean the old-school definition: the kind of person who tinkers with technology because they're curious, they're capable, and they live and work in an environment that isn't quite the way they'd like it to be so they look for ways to modify it.

And to that kind of hacker, the worst thing you can possibly do is tell them no. No, you're not allowed to change that - not for any technical reason; you're not allowed to change it because we said you're not. It's against our policy. It's against the law. It's not allowed unless you give us more money. 

In 1980, the folks at Xerox donated a laser printer to the Artificial Intelligence laboratory at MIT, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Xerox and MIT were both a really big deal in the early days of computer science: Xerox came up with dozens of astonishing innovations and utterly failed to turn any of them into viable products, which is why fifty years later they're still stuck making photocopiers. MIT, on the other hand... MIT produced LISP, fax machines, passwords, ethernet, email, the Apollo 11 guidance software, RSA cryptography, spreadsheets, blockchains, the Roomba - and, maybe, free software.

You see, the new laser printer had a problem: it was built around the same printing engine as Xerox photocopiers, and it was prone to jamming. Now, when a photocopier jams - just to check: you folks know what a photocopier is, right? - it jams right there, while you're stood in front of it making your copies. So you swear and maybe kick it a bit, and then open up the side and find that sad-looking crumpled bit of paper, and gently tease it out of the print rollers, and then close the lid and hopefully it all starts up again.

But a network printer? That's on the other side of the building. So you send your print job, and then next time you go to get a cup of coffee you swing by the printer to pick it up... and discover the printer's jammed. And it isn't jammed on *your* job: it's been jammed all morning. Your printout is now the tenth job in a print queue that hasn't moved since 10am. So you unjam it, and you go back to your desk, and when you come back a bit later you find it's jammed again...

One of the folks working in the MIT lab at the time was Richard Stallman, often known by his initials rms. Stallman is something of a divisive figure in the world of computer science: there are folks who think he's some kind of godlike genius, and folks who think he's nothing of the sort, but I think we need to at least acknowledge that he's a significant figure in the history of free software.

The way Stallman tells the story, he wanted to modify their new laser printer, so that if it jammed, it would notify everybody who was logged into the network, and then whoever was nearby could go and clear the jam right away, instead of waiting until somebody discovered it a few hours later. So he asked Xerox for the source code for the printer's operating software - and they said no. They refused to let him have it.

There is one interpretation that says this was a turning point; that this was the incident which galvanised Stallman into spending the rest of his life dedicated to promoting free and open software. There is another interpretation that says it pissed him off so much he's still butthurt about it over forty years later. I suspect both interpretations are true, but Stallman has spoken multiple times about that Xerox printer incident and said that was what inspired his commitment to free software activism over the next few decades.

Before we go any further, it might be a good idea to talk about what we mean by "free software" - because so much of the conversation around rights and licensing over the last few decades hinges on what sort of freedom we're actually talking about. There's historically been a distinction between "free as in beer" and "free as in speech" - free as the opposite of expensive, and free as the opposite of, well, restricted.

Let's talk about free as in beer first. Now, help me out here with a bit of ad-hoc audience research: everybody out there who has a Gmail account, stand up. Yeah, that's quite a lot of you. Now, if you pay money for Gmail, sit down. Yep, that's still quite a lot. You folks are enjoying free software: free only in the very specific sense that you aren't paying any money to use it. Thanks - you can sit down now. Now, ask yourself a question: what would you do if tomorrow you went to log in to Gmail and found out they'd deleted your account? What would you do if you wanted to stop using Gmail? How easily could you move all your old emails to another platform?

Gmail's funded by advertising, right? They make their money by selling your attention to advertisers, by putting paid listings right there in your inbox. And the Gmail platform is just computer code. It probably wouldn't be *that* hard to modify the Gmail code, find the lines that display those advertisements, comment them out... but of course you can't do that.

So what's the opposite of free as in beer? 

You know, I tried maybe a dozen times to come up with a decent answer to that question. The opposite of free beer is, y'know, paid beer. You give somebody some money, you get some beer. You can drink it, you can keep it, you can sell it... except maybe you can't drink it, for medical reasons, or religious reasons, or maybe you shouldn't drink it because you're only twelve years old. You can't keep it forever; it'll go bad after a while. You can't sell it, because in most countries it's illegal to sell alcohol without a license... turns out that beer is actually a terrible example when it comes to things that aren't free. Let's use something else. What about music? There's a couple of excellent record shops near where I live. I can go in there and buy a copy of Guns'n'Roses "Appetite for Destruction", on vinyl, and do pretty much whatever I like with it. I can sell it. I can listen to it. I can keep it for a long as I like. But if, say, I decided to run for President, and I used "Welcome to the Jungle" as the music for my TV adverts? Yeah. Not allowed to do *that* - doesn't matter that I can prove I bought the album. I might own the record but I don't own the recording. And, of course, the shift to downloads and streaming over the last few decades means most people don't actually buy records any more, they buy recordings - and if you subscribe to Spotify or Apple Music, you don't even get to keep the recording...

OK, maybe music is also a terrible example. What about a car? Oh, but hang on, lots of cars now have internet connections so if you try to sell them to somebody else all kinds of things stop working, like satellite navigation... 

OK, the worst thing that can happen to any kind of digital device is "bricking it", right? Damaging it so badly that it won't even switch on any more... so maybe let's take that as our premise. A brick. A nice, solid, old-fashioned clay brick. If I buy a brick, I own it. It's mine. I can keep it pretty much forever. I can sell it. I can destroy it. I can rent it out... hey, friend, looks like your pile of newspapers there might be in danger of blowing away; have you heard about rent-a-brick? Fifty cents an hour or five bucks for the whole day. And if I rent you my brick, and then come back at the end of the day and you've run off with it - that's theft. You've stolen my brick, and now I can't use it.

Some software used to work like bricks. In the days when consoles used physical game cartridges, the software itself was so intrinsically coupled to the plastic cartridge it came on that we could basically treat it as a physical commodity. Any of you folks old enough to remember when you could rent Sega games from Blockbuster? And you'd play all weekend to try to complete Sonic Hedgehog or Street Fighter II before you had to take it back? You could buy them, sell them, lend them to your friends, rent them out: they were commodities.

During the 80s and 90s, there was a certain amount of rivalry between consoles and computers. The console kids were... well, when I was a teenager in Bristol, in the early 1990s, the console kids rode skateboards, and shaved their heads, and were usually in trouble at school for setting stuff on fire. The computer kids had mountain bikes, and long hair, and we also set stuff on fire but we were usually smart enough not to get caught. And when it came to video games, the computer kids had the Atari ST, the Amiga 500, the IBM PC... and piracy. Yarr.

If I wanted to play X-Wing, or Eye of the Beholder, I had a choice. I could buy it. Boxed games retailed for between thirty and forty pounds - the same as twenty Big Macs, or a new pair of jeans.

Or I could copy it. Copying software was ridiculously easy, especially if your PC had two floppy disk drives... and if it didn't, MS-DOS included a command called diskcopy that would prompt you to keep swapping disks until the copy was done. Because copying the actual games was so easy, lots of those games included some kind of copy protection system: you'd have to type in the 25th word on page 19 of the manual, or use your cardboard Secret Decoder Ring to find the correct symbol to click on. Other publishers tried to exploit quirks in the IBM PC floppy disk controller to make un-copyable disks - in the days before device drivers, it was relatively easy to make hardware do all kinds of weird things that weren't in the spec, like putting hidden sectors on a disk which the diskcopy tools couldn't see. Copying games was definitely illegal, and if you made a hundred copies of X-Wing and sold them at your local computer fair for ten quid each it was just possible the police might take an interest... but schoolkids swapping copies of Lemmings and Monkey Island with dog-eared photocopies of the instruction manual? We're not exactly talking organised crime here.

There was a third option, though. In the classified adverts at the back of the computer magazines were companies that sold free software. Games, utilities, programming tools... mostly developed by enthusiasts, in their free time. The software itself was free, but unless you were one of the relatively few people who had a dial-up modem, the only way to get hold of it was to pay somebody a few quid to copy it onto a disk and send it to you in the mail. This was completely legal: everybody understood you weren't buying the program itself, you were paying for the disk and the postage.

Folks started referring to this kind of distribution as "shareware", but that became a bit of an umbrella term covering a whole variety of different models. Some software was completely in the public domain: the authors had waived any copyright over it, to the extent that they didn't include any contact information. You like it? Use it. Don't like it? Erase the disk and use it for something else. Some authors included a README file with their home address and a note saying "this is free but if you like it please send me some money" - or, in a few cases, they didn't want money but if you liked their software, send them a postcard. Some shareware was "try before you buy", cut-down or restricted versions of the full program which you could get by mail order.

One particularly weird example of free software was a program called Ford Simulator. This was published in 1987, by the Ford motor company. It ran on MS-DOS, with amazing four-colour CGA graphics - and it was an advertisement: the disk came free with a magazine, and I guess the idea was you'd run the program and go "wow, this simulated Ford driving experience is amazing, I gotta go out and buy me a Ford right now!" - and there was even a feature where you could print out the spec of the car you just "drove" in the simulation, and take it to your local Ford dealer.

I have no idea if they sold any actual cars on the back of it, but the fact that Ford explicitly encouraged people to copy it and share it around meant just about every IBM PC owner in the late 1980s had a copy of Ford Simulator somewhere.

But probably the most successful variant of the shareware model was the one pioneered by this guy: Scott Miller, the founder of Apogee Software. Scott had created a couple of PC games in the 1980s which he'd published as shareware, and was making a few thousand dollars a year in registration fees, but his latest game, Kingdom of Kroz, was way bigger than anything he'd done before, with over sixty levels. He broke the game into three episodes: episode 1 was released as shareware, and when you completed it, a screen popped up: if you wanted episodes 2 and 3, send a cheque to this address. Kingdom of Kroz episodes 2 and 3 made nearly a hundred thousand dollars. A few years later, Scott Miller got hold of a game called Dangerous Dave, created by a group of developers working at Softdisk, a games publisher in Louisiana. That was these three gentlemen: John Romero, John Carmack, and Tom Hall; they called their group "Ideas from the Deep", and they'd figured out a way to do smooth side-scrolling graphics on the IBM PC, something nobody had ever done before. Over the course of a few weeks, they'd put together a PC version of Super Mario Bros 3, which they sent to Nintendo - and as John Romero tells it, "they told us good job, and you can't do this." - the last thing Nintendo wanted was kids swapping 3.5 floppy disk copies of Super Mario instead of buying Nintendo games consoles. Scott Miller suggested that they use their new coding techniques to create an original game, and Apogee would publish it using the same model as Kingdom of Kroz: give away episode 1 for free, and charge for episodes 2 and 3.

That game was Commander Keen: Invasion of the Vorticons - the story of an eight-year-old genius who has to recover all the stolen parts of his spaceship from Mars, armed with a pogo-stick and a football helmet. Apogee published Commander Keen in December 1990; it made thirty thousand dollars in two weeks, enough to persuade Tom Hall and the two Johns to quit their jobs at Softdisk and start their own company: Ideas from the Deep became IFD, and then ID, and then just id. id would go on to develop some of the most successful and influential games in history. Wolfenstein 3D pioneered the 3d first-person shooter. In December 1993, Doom introduced the world to networked multiplayer gaming - and took down just about every college network in America as students rushed to download it and then challenge each other to deathmatch games over the network. And in 1996, Quake was the first truly 3D first person shooter - and one of the earliest games to take advantage of the dedicated 3D accelerator hardware like the 3Dfx Voodoo.

Those three games didn't just represent milestones in gaming technology, though. They all used the Apogee model: the first episode was free, and you had to pay for the rest - but the way you got hold of each free episode reflected a paradigm shift in the way software was distributed My copy of Wolfenstein 3D was free on the cover of PC Format magazine; I got a copy of Doom from a friend at college who knew somebody who knew somebody with a modem, and I downloaded Quake from the [idsoftware.com](http://idsoftware.com) website using Netscape Navigator. That website's still available via the Wayback Machine, and when I was getting screenshots for this talk I noticed the wonderfully historic detail that you could download Quake as "one huge .zip file" - back in the days when 8.5 megabytes was a huge ZIP file - or as seven separate files you could copy onto floppy disks to give to a friend who doesn't have internet access. Aaaaah.

For me, and for a lot of people around the world, this point in history - 1996, 1997 - was the moment we got connected. We got a dial-up modem, installed a web browser, set up our first email address, and never looked back - and in 1998, Apple released the first iMac, a computer which was revolutionary for a whole bunch of reasons, not least that it had a built-in modem and it didn't have a floppy disk drive: this was the future, and in the future you didn't save your work on disk, you sent it by email. The internet had gone mainstream... and for a lot of the folks who'd been online the whole time, this was a disaster: all these non-techies with their ridiculous ideas about websites and e-commerce and dot com startups... that's not what the internet was *for*. These people were a bunch of idiots! They even thought Quake was free software!

Turns out that, while the rest of us were getting our shareware off magazine covers and mail order, there was a thriving digital community of hackers and activists who'd been working towards a very different kind of free software. Software that embodied what they called the four essential freedoms:

0: The freedom to run the program however you want, for any purpose

1: The freedom to study how the program works, and modify it do to what you want

2: The freedom to distribute copies

3: The freedom to share your own modifications

These were, and are, the philosophy underlying the GNU project, set up by Richard Stallman in 1983 with the explicit goal of developing a completely free Unix-compatible operating system: an operating system kernel, text editor, a shell, a C compiler, linker, assembler - a critical mass of tools and utilities that the community could then use to build whatever other pieces were missing: spreadsheets, graphics tools, networking utilities. GNU software was coordinated and distributed via the internet: mailing lists, Usenet groups, bulletin boards and FTP servers - and, unlike most shareware and public domain software, it was distributed as source code, with the expectation that users would compile it themselves for their own hardware. By 1991, the GNU project had almost created a complete operating system: all they were missing was a working operating system kernel. Which is a bit like saying you've almost built a car: you've got wheels, seats, windows, a stereo, a gearbox... you just haven't quite figured out how to do the engine yet.

Perhaps more significantly, though, they had created and published a document called the GNU Public License, or the GPL, which codified the four essential freedoms into a format that, if necessary, could be enforced by a court of law. 

Then in 1991, Linux Torvalds, a 21-year-old student at the University of Helsinki, announced on Usenet he was working on a "free operating system - just a hobby, won't be big and professional like gnu) for 386(486) AT clones", and uploaded the source code for his kernel to the university's FTP server. By December, the combination of Linus' "Linux" kernel and the GNU tools was self-hosting - you could use it to compile itself - and Linus had published his code under the GNU Public License; for the first time in history, there was a complete, working computer operating system that contained no proprietary code, copyrights or patents, and which was distributed under a license agreement that guaranteed its users the freedom to run it, modify it, share it - even sell it, as long as they didn't try to impose any restrictions on the customers they sold it to.

Now, I just want to pause here, because around the same time this is going on, there's another milestone in the history of free software. This is Phil Zimmerman. As a kid, Phil was obsessed with secret codes and ciphers; by the 1980s, he'd earned his degree in Computer Science from Florida Atlantic university, and along the way become heavily involved in political activism. Phil thought it would be a great idea if there was a program people could use to send emails and share files over the internet without anybody else being able to read them. He had an idea, he had a name - Pretty Good Privacy - he was a pretty good C programmer, and by the start of 1991 he had a working prototype. One thing he *didn't* have was a license to use the encryption technique at the heart of PGP: that was owned by a company called RSA Data Security Incorporated, who had actually been granted a patent on public key cryptography. There's one account that says he thought he did because Jim Bidzos, the CEO of RSA Data Security, had told him over dinner that it would be fine. There's another account that says he just didn't care.

 The thing that made PGP such a big deal happened in January 1991: the US senate was drafting some new antiterrorism legislation, Bill 266, and on January 24th one of the senators sponsoring that bill added some new language: "providers of electronic communications services shall ensure that communication systems permit the government to obtain the plaintext contents of voice, data and other communications when appropriately authorised by law."

Now, there's these points where you're researching a talk like this and you go "holy crap, really?"... does anybody know who was the head of the Senate Judiciary Committee in January 1991? No, of course you don't... it was a senator from Delaware called Joseph Biden. 

Yep, that one.

Bill 266 would basically have made strong crypto illegal: the only way to comply would be to build backdoors into any cryptography system, and crypto systems with back doors are inherently insecure. Phil Zimmermann realised that if he could get his PGP software out before the new bill became law, the law itself would be irrelevant. He decided to release PGP as free software, and publish the source code onto the internet - except Phil Zimmermann, cypherpunk extraordinaire, wasn't on the internet. So he gave a copy of the PGP source code to a friend of his, a guy called Kelly Goen, who then spent the day driving around the San Francisco Bay Area with a laptop and a thing called an acoustic coupler modem: he'd stop at a public payphone, hook up his laptop, connect to the internet, upload a few copies of PGP to various bulletin boards and public FTP servers, then disconnect and drive off. Goen apparently only uploaded PGP to internet sites in the United States, but on the internet, that doesn't matter: within a day, PGP was all over the world. 

Ironically, while all this was going on, Senator Biden had actually withdrawn his amendment to the anti-terrorism bill, but it didn't matter. PGP was out, and as Troy Hunt once said, "trying to delete information from the Internet is like trying to remove piss from a swimming pool."

Then, one day in 1993, Phil Zimmerman was visited by two women from the United States Customs Service, and asked him all sorts of questions about how PGP worked, how it was distributed, and so on. Phil assumed they had been sent by RSA Data Security and he was being shaken down for patent infringement; he answered all their questions, they went away, and he figured that was the end of that. Then a few weeks later, Zimmerman was informed he was under investigation for illegally exporting munitions.

Now, this is where this gets a bit surreal. When we talk about strong cryptography, we're talking about how long it would take somebody to break them: if somebody out there with a huge amount of money and technical resources really, *really* wanted to know what was in your email, what would it cost them to break it? In a well-designed crypto system, this is dictated by the size of the key, measured in bits. Each bit doubles the effort required to break that system, so cracking a 16-bit key is twice as hard as cracking a 15-bit key. The United States government had ruled that any crypto system stronger than 40 bits was considered "military grade", and consequently covered by regulations about exporting munitions... and PGP used a 128-bit key.

Zimmerman was in a weird legal limbo: he wasn't under arrest, but he was under investigation by a grand jury. His lawyers advised him to keep quiet, but he didn't think he'd done anything wrong; he believed US citizens' right to secure communication was more important than export restrictions, and most people he spoke to agreed: even folks who didn't know anything about the internet or email liked the idea of being able to conceal their communications from government agents.

Furthermore: the export regulations didn't make any sense. In 1994 Bruce Schneier published this book, Applied Cryptography: a cookbook of mathematics, cryptosystems and algorithms. The book described literally everything you'd need to build a 128-bit cryptosystem - or even stronger - and included a floppy disk with example source code. Turns out it was legal to export the book, as long as you didn't include the floppy disk.

A year later, Netscape released the first version of their browser to support Secure Sockets Layer - SSL, which used public key cryptography to protect things like credit card details - and, sure enough, there was a "domestic" edition for US citizens, which used 128-bit keys, and an "international edition" which was restricted to 40-bit encryption.

The US finally dropped their investigation into Phil Zimmermann in 1996, without filing any charges, and by the end of the millennium the US had overhauled their export regulations and there were no longer any restrictions on exporting cryptography systems or products. 

So by this point, I think we've covered all the bases. We've got proprietary software, we've got illegal copies of proprietary software. We've got people publishing their own programs as freeware, or as shareware, or placing it in the public domain, or releasing their code under the GPL. And, with PGP, we've got a situation where the creator of the software actively WANTS to share their code but the government tells them they're not allowed to.

This is probably an interesting time to ask the big question: why? What motivated all these people to publish their code without demanding payment in return? I think it's fair to say that every single person we've met so far in this talk - OK, apart from Joe Biden - is, first and foremost, an enthusiastic hobby programmer. A hacker. Somebody who delights in the craft of programming, and relishes the challenge of translating the ideas in their head into executable code.

So how did they choose what to work on - and why, when they were done, did they release it for free?

For the folks at id software, they wrote the games they wanted to play. It's that simple. I saw a talk by John Romero at an event in Berlin last year, and watching him talking about working on Doom and Quake, it was obvious that he and the rest of the team at id loved video games - and to them, the shareware model was just the best way they found to generate sales, make money, buy better computers, and use them to write, and play, more games. The fact they ended up so rich half of them went out and bought Ferraris didn't really change a thing: most of those folks still write code every day, because that's just what they do.

For Linus Torvalds, I honestly believe he wrote the first Linux kernel just for fun, to see if he could, and had absolutely no clue that his student hobby project would end up powering half of the internet and a few billion Android smartphones.

For Stallman, and Zimmermann, and the GNU project, though, software was the executable expression of an ideology: free software driven by the fundamental belief that free software makes the world a better place. The problem is, as we've learned over and over again during the last quarter century: free software doesn't pay the bills.

You might also have noticed that we're almost halfway through this talk, and I haven't yet mentioned the phrase "open source"... and the reason is that, by this point in history, the late 1990s, that term didn't exist. What we had instead was a bunch of people subscribing to different interpretations of what it meant for software to be "free" - from the GNU project's hardline "free as in free speech" stance, to software that came free on a magazine cover, and everything in between. The combination of the GNU project and the Linux kernel resulted in a completely free operating system, and the world wide web had 

seen a massive spike in demand for server-capable operating systems... did any of you folks ever try running a web server on Windows 95? Yeah... not a great solution. 

Incidentally, we're going to be talking about that particular operating system a lot, and from this point forward, I'm going to call it Linux. I acknowledge that it should technically be GNU/Linux or GNU plus Linux, and that by calling it Linux, I am going to upset Richard Stallman and some of his friends. Richard: I don't care. You wouldn't like me anyway. I use Windows, I use Google, I use a credit card, and for what it's worth, I think GNU is the worst name for a software project in history. Yes, it's a "recursive acronym" for GNU's Not Unix... I sincerely believe there are two kinds of people in the world: people who think recursive acronyms are funny, and people who own deodorant and shampoo.

But on a purely practical note: it's just not a nice word and I don't enjoy saying it. "It's pronounced as one syllable, like grew but with an 'n'"... you can't pronounce GNU as one syllable without nearly swallowing your own tongue in the process.

So I'm going to call it Linux. 

We'd ended up in a weird situation. If your company wanted to set up a web server, or an email server, or a database, you could do the whole thing without spending any money - as long as you had the time and the expertise to do it. Most companies didn't. They wanted to buy something that would just work, and have a phone number they could call if it didn't. Companies like Red Hat and SUSE saw an opportunity here: they could sell free software! Download all the sources, compile them, put them on a CD-ROM in a nice box with a printed manual, maybe throw in a year of technical support - and as long as they made it clear that all the actual code they were providing was also available on the internet for free, that was all completely legal.

The biggest stumbling block was that word "free". Free meant too many things to too many people. Companies struggled with the idea of paying money for "free software", and the confusion was making it increasingly obvious that there was a significant gap between the hardline definition of "free" adopted by the GNU project and the closed-source proprietary model used by companies like Microsoft. When Netscape announced plans to release the source code to their Navigator web browser in 1998, it galvanised the community into coming up with a better term. One of the key players in that movement was Christine Peterson, the founder of the Foresight Institute. As Christine describes it:

"At these meetings, we discussed the need for a new term due to the confusion factor. The argument was as follows: those new to the term "free software" assume it is referring to the price. Oldtimers must then launch into an explanation, usually given as follows: "We mean free as in freedom, not free as in beer." At this point, a discussion on software has turned into one about the price of an alcoholic beverage. The problem was not that explaining the meaning is impossible—the problem was that the name for an important idea should not be so confusing to newcomers. A clearer term was needed. No political issues were raised regarding the free software term; the issue was its lack of clarity to those new to the concept."

Christine suggested the term "open source" at a meeting in February 1998; a few days later, Eric Raymond and Bruce Perens set up the [opensource.org](http://opensource.org) website. Netscape began referring to their forthcoming code publication as "open source", and an event in April organised by Tim O'Reilly as a "free software summit" soon became known as the "open source summit": Richard Stallman was not invited, which many people interpreted as a deliberate gesture intended to emphasise the nascent open source movement's attempts to distance themselves from the Free Software Foundation.

Open source wasn't just about avoiding the word "free", though. It was about addressing a complex, but completely legitimate, concern that was beginning to get a lot of traction in the industry.

The GNU Public License is sometimes referred to as a "viral" license, because of a clause in that license which specifically requires you to make the source code to any distributed derivative works under the same license. What a lot of folks don't realise, because it doesn't come up very often, is that nowhere in the GPL does it say I can't charge money for this: there are numerous references in the wording of the license to "rendering a program non-free" but they're talking about free as in speech.

In theory, I could create a Rockstar compiler, from scratch, license it under the GPL, and sell it for a thousand dollars. So far, so good. Now let's say somebody here - you, sir. You decide you absolutely must have the latest Rockstar compiler technology, so you buy it. I give you the executable binary - what the GPL refers to as the object code - and you give me a thousand bucks. Done. I do not *have* to include the source code, or publish it online - but I do have to make it available to you, the customer, in a machine readable format, on request, and at a reasonable cost. So I include a line in the README file saying if you want the source code, I'll mail it to you on a USB stick for five dollars plus shipping.

Now, you can use your new Rockstar compiler for anything you like. The *output* of that software is NOT automatically covered by the GPL: you wanna use Rockstar to build AI-powered spreadsheet programs and sell them to banks for a million dollars as proprietary software, you go ahead. You can even send me five bucks to get the source code, and modify that to suit your particular requirements - Rockstar: Nitro Edition! - and use your modified compiler to compile your spreadsheet software. All fine.

You wanna copy the code off that USB stick and put it on GitHub? I can't stop you. You want to sell your modified Rockstar compiler for a hundred dollars and steal all my best customers? I can't stop you... but you are legally required to make the code for Rockstar Nitro available, under the same terms, to anybody who buys a copy. And if you don't: I can sue you.

The fundamental mechanism that the GPL operates on is also what makes it radically different to most other free software licenses. If I release my code into the public domain, I waive any future copyright claim I have over that code. If I contribute code to an open source project that requires a contributor license agreement, a CLA, then I give up my copyright claim: any ownership transfers to the legal body named in that CLA - if any of you folks here have contributed code to the .NET runtime, you'll have signed a document transferring ownership and copyright of that code to the .NET Foundation. If I publish code under the GPL, though, I do not in any way relinquish my legal rights as the author of that code. The fact you can buy it, use it, run it, modify it, share it, put it on GitHub doesn't stop the code I wrote being legally recognised as my work: I'm still the legal author and owner, and I have chosen to make that work available to you under the terms of a license.

One interesting detail of the GPL is that merely *running* the software doesn't actually require you to accept the terms of the license, but it does make it a requirement that if software is published under the GPL, the GPL must be the *only* license that allows modification or distributing copies. No backdoors: no way anybody can say "yeah, I know it's GPL, but actually I paid them a hundred bucks to be allowed to distribute modified copies without being bound by the GPL". The act of "modifying or propagating" the software indicates your acceptance of the licence - so if you publish a modified version of my code, in any form, that means you've agreed to the terms of the license, and if you don't obey those terms, I can take you to court.

Now, as any of you folks who have worked with lawyers will know, most day-to-day decisions regarding intellectual property in the tech industry are made based on legal hypothesis. Tech moves a lot faster than law does, and a lot of the time when companies are trying to figure out the legal implications of a particular decision, the best they can get is lawyers saying "we don't know for sure, because nothing like these has ever actually been tested in court, BUT IF IT WAS here's what we think would probably happen". 

And so it was with the GPL for a long while... and I'm sure a *bunch* of companies were using GPL code in their products, either because they didn't know, or because they didn't care. And I'm sure that, most of the time, they got away with it.

Then in 2003, Andrew Miklas - who you might have heard of; he went on to found a company called Pager Duty - Andrew sent an email to the Linux Kernel Mailing List about this: the Linksys WRT54G wireless router. This was a hugely popular home router in the early 2000s; it cost $129, and Linksys had sold nearly half a million units in the first quarter of 2002.

Andrew Miklas had downloaded a copy of the firmware for the router, extracted the contents, and determined that the WRT56G was actually running a Linux kernel and a bunch of other software covered by the GPL - but there was no mention of this anywhere on Linksys' website. The reason this was particularly interesting was that the router firmware appeared to work with a whole bunch of wireless networking chips that didn't have any open source drivers. Selling half a million routers definitely counted as "distributing software", so if Linksys was complying with the terms of the GPL, they were legally obliged to make the source code available to anybody who'd bought a WRT54G router.

Now, the fun part: while all this is going on in the background, Linksys gets acquired by Cisco Systems, and Cisco find out they've got a problem. Linksys had bought all the wifi chips in the router from a company called Broadcom. Broadcom, in turn, had outsourced the firmware development to an overseas developer, who had somehow failed to tell anybody the firmware they delivered was built on Linux and GPL code.

Cisco's response to all this was "this wasn't our fault, but we accept it's our responsibility, and we'll publish the source code, just give us time to figure out the details" - and in 2003, they published the source code for 

Now, there's a detail here that I can't quite figure out from what's available online. The source code for the Linksys WRT router was definitely published online in 2003, because the Slashdot post talking about it is still online and is dated July 6 2003. That release formed the nucleus of a project called OpenWRT, a GNU/Linux distribution for embedded devices - and in the process, it turned the Linksys WRT54G into one of the most popular devices in history, because thanks to the OpenWRT project, it wasn't just a wireless router any more: it was a hundred-dollar headless Linux computer with a wireless chip and a four-port network switch.

So we know the code was published in 2003. We also know that in 2003, the Free Software Foundation began working with Cisco to help them achieve GPL compliance, and that five years later, the FSF ran out of patience and filed a lawsuit against Cisco Systems regarding the use of GPL software in Linksys devices. The lawsuit and the date of the filing is a matter of public record: what I couldn't figure out is exactly what happened in the intervening five years. 

My hunch is that Cisco was publishing the odd release here and there and hoping the whole thing would blow over, and the FSF were getting frustrated by the apparent lack of progress... but whatever the circumstances, it was the first time the Free Software Foundation made it as far as actually taking legal action, and in May 2009, the case was settled out of court, with Cisco appointing a compliance director, committing to make the full source code available for any product which used GPL, and making an "undisclosed financial contribution" to the FSF.

The only instance I could find of the GPL actually making it as far as a court verdict was in Germany: in 2006, Harald Welte, a free software evangelist who had contributed code to the Linux kernel, filed suit against D-Link for selling a networked attached storage device based on Linux without making the source code available. The Frankfurt District court ruled in Welte's favour, confirming the validity of the GPL under German law; D-Link was ordered to pay Welte's costs, and to stop distributing the device in question. Whether they did or not I have no idea.

Of course, at the dawn of the "open source" movement back in 1998, none of this had happened yet, but it was pretty clear that it was going to, and that made a lot of people, and companies, extremely wary of the GPL: Steve Ballmer said in 2001, when he was CEO of Microsoft, that "Linux is a cancer that attaches itself in an intellectual property sense to everything it touches. That's the way that the license works."

Ballmer was wrong, and that's not remotely how but that didn't matter: this quote just reinforced the idea of free software as as threat. Actually, while we're talking about Microsoft and threats, I want to take a moment to remember something amazing that never happened.

Anybody here remember WordPerfect? The DOS word processor with the blue screen? In the mid 1990s, WordPerfect got acquired by Novell - the folks who made Novell NetWare - and became part of Novell PerfectOffice, along with the Quattro Pro spreadsheet, a presentation tool, a calendar and email program called GroupWise. Basically an entire office suite for Microsoft Windows - and it was way better than Microsoft Office. Faster, more stable, more features.

In 1998, the Corel corporation bought PerfectOffice. It became Corel Office... and a year later, they shipped Corel Linux. I actually bought Corel Linux in a shop. It was the first Linux distro I ever installed that worked with my sound card and network card straight out of the box, it ran WordPerfect: you could even get CorelDraw, Corel's flagship graphics program, for Linux. Some of the apps were ported, others ran on top of a Windows emulation layer for Linux called WINE - in fact, the Corel Linux team contributed a ridiculous amount of code to the WINE project, including the entire printing subsystem. And it was all open source. It was ambitious, it was glorious... it was doomed.

It's hard to find a definitive account of exactly what happened, but the consensus seems to be that Microsoft made a huge investment in the Windows version of Corel Office - mainly to deflect accusations that Microsoft Office was a de facto monopoly - and as a condition of the deal, Corel had to stop working on Linux. The code, of course, was all open source, and Corel Linux became Xandros, which became Lindows, which became Linspire, which is still around today. 

But however you frame it, Microsoft at the turn of the millennium believed the future was about selling software: Windows, Office, Exchange, Visual Studio. Computing belonged on the desktop, and anything that threated Windows' stranglehold on the desktop computing market was a threat to Microsoft's existence.

That has changed dramatically, and I think the reason for that is one word: cloud.

The cloud changed everything, because it unlocked a whole new kind of revenue stream for companies that wanted to make money out of software. Sure, you can have the programs for free - we don't care, because you're going to need somewhere to run them... and oh, look at that, we just happen to have all these handy data centres lying around. The cloud - Amazon Web Services, Microsoft Azure, Google Cloud Platform, IBM, Oracle - unlocked access to economies of scale we'd never even imagined before.

During the early 2000s, my job title was "webmaster" - and this was in the days when a lot of companies had one, maybe two people, who ran their entire web platform: somebody who was equally at home making buttons in Photoshop and crimping connectors onto RJ45 network cables. I built and ran entire websites: HTML, CSS, graphics, Linux, Apache, MySQL, right down to physically building the server that it would run on and plugging it into the network.

If you'd asked me to host, say, a MySQL database for you... I could do that. I'd charge you a thousand pounds for the hardware, another thousand for my time to install it, set it up, plus maybe two hundred quid a month to cover power, internet, and support. I ran a few systems like that. They were what we call snowflake servers, because no two were alike. It was a fun way to make a living and you got to play around with cool toys - but it didn't scale; if I suddenly got twenty new clients all wanting a MySQL database by the end of the day? Not a chance. Sorry.

But... scale that up by a factor of a thousand. Instead of building servers, you build datacentres. You're not even thinking about individual servers any more: if a box fails, you just ignore it; if you end up with four dead boxes in the same rack, swap out the entire rack. Every single detail is automated: operating system, networking, firewall, application stack, security, configuration, backup... 

Now you go to all my clients and say "hey, you know we can give you a MySQL database in THE CLOUD and it'll only cost £50 a month"? And before you know it, you're raking in a few million quid a month just for hosting MySQL databases.

And you start throwing in more options. You need a web server? No problem. ElasticSearch? Gotcha. Redis? Yes mate! Video transcoding? Logging? Email? Cloud cloud cloud cloud...

STORY TIME. Friends, let me tell you the story of Sammy the Squirrel. Sammy lived in the forest, among all the other happy little woodland creatures. Every Sunday morning, all the woodland folk would gather in the clearing by the old oak tree and show everybody else what they'd been working on. And Sammy liked to write video games. Just for fun. One week, Sammy turned up with a new game they'd been working on: Acorn Adventure. It was brilliant. You play a curious little squirrel, running around the forest gathering acorns for the winter... just, lovely stuff. And Sammy was quite happy to give away copies for free, hoping the other woodland folk would take their game and add their own characters, and levels, or use it to create completely new games.

Next week, when Sammy arrived in the clearing for Show and Tell, they noticed that Jeff the Raccoon had got there early - and Jeff had brought an arcade machine! A proper old-school arcade cabinet, with shiny graphics, and buttons, and a joystick... and it was running Acorn Adventure. This was AWESOME. Sammy's game, running on a proper arcade machine - and only 50 cents a play! Before long, all the woodland folk were queuing up to play; some of the smaller animals were pestering their parents for money so they could have another go, they were competing for high scores...

The following week, Jeff the Raccoon showed up in a shiny brand new pickup truck, with TWO arcade machines. The woodland folk just couldn't get enough of Acorn Adventure... and for Sammy, the thrill of seeing everybody lining up to play their game wore off pretty quick. Especially once the animals started to complain. "It's too hard to beat the owl on Level 2!" "You need better graphics!" "The music sucks! fix it!"

Sammy tried, patiently, to explain that Acorn Adventure was free software and they were welcome to contribute to it... but of course, it wasn't free. The rest of the animals were paying fifty cents a game. As far as they were concerned, they were paying customers. And, well, winter was coming and Sammy had been so busy working on Acorn Adventure that they'd not had time to gather enough actual acorns, and with the cost of living crisis and everything Sammy was thinking wouldn't it be nice if they could maybe make a bit of money from their game?

Next week, Jeff the Raccoon showed up for Show and Tell in a solid gold helicopter that ran on vintage champagne.

Sammy was there, as usual, and Sammy had brought along something new: Acorn Adventure 2.0! They'd improved the graphics, and added better music, and made it easier to beat the owl... and they'd also made a new rule: Acorn Adventure 2.0 was still completely free. You could take it home, play it, modify it, make your own levels - but if you wanted to install it on a pay-to-play arcade machine, you had to pay Sammy a dollar so they could buy enough acorns 

Ooooh. The woodland animals were not happy about that... it all kicked off. Screeching and howling and frothing at the mouth and throwing rotten vegetables and saying Sammy was a traitor and a sellout and all sorts of terrible names, and one of them got so angry they took the code for Acorn Adventure 1.0 and renamed it OpenNuts.

Or... maybe that's not what happened. Maybe when the angry mob show up at Sammy's table demanding better graphics and new levels and more features... maybe at that point Wilbur the Weasel shows up and offers to help. Just a few small things at first: some new artwork here, a bit of music there, a bugfix in the high score table. Then more: Wilbur's added a completely new level or two, new characters, a new graphics engine... Sammy's sort of losing track of all the changes, but hey, that's the beauty of free software, right? One feature all the animals have been asking for is electronic payments, so they can pay using PayPal instead of carrying bags of coins around... and sure enough, Acorn Adventure 3D lets you connect your PayPal account. All the woodland folk are getting really excited about Acorn Adventure 3D, every video arcade in the forest is ready to install the new version... then one of the play-testers notices something weird. The PayPal screen isn't a real PayPal screen. It looks like one, sure... and it does actually connect to PayPal... but it's also sending copies of everybody's email and password to an IP address in Belarus. Turns out Wilbur's new payment system isn't exactly what it claims to be... but Wilbur's vanished, and so has the mysterious mob of angry animals that put so much pressure on Sammy in the first place... and now you come to think of it, you hadn't really seen any of them around before... 

Free and open source software has succeeded in ways that we couldn't imagine back in the 1990s. Back when I was getting all excited at the prospect of running WordPerfect on Corel Linux, the best that anybody realistically expected was to take maybe ten percent of the desktop computing market that was dominated by Microsoft Windows. The idea that there would be multiple trillion-dollar corporations built around free software - not to mention a modified Linux kernel in literally billions of Android mobile devices? Unimaginable.

But that's where we are today. Companies like Amazon and Google are turning over billions of dollars in revenue every year, and a substantial part of that revenue comes from free software - and, in many case, doing so thanks to a very specific part of the GNU Public License which says that if your users are only interacting with a program's output across a network, that doesn't constitute distribution.

In other words: you can take the Linux kernel, and any other software published under the GPL, use it to build, say, a social network that's used by billions of people, and you are under no obligation to publish the source code for your social network.

The Free Software Foundation wised up to this a long while ago, and created what's known as the Affero GPL - Affero was the company that collaborated with the FSF on the wording, and the first organisation that published code under that license, way back in 2002. It's basically the GPL version 3, with an additional clause which says that even if you don't actually publish software, you're required to make full source code available to anybody who interacts with your code across a network. And... it's a viral license, so if any of you folks out there *really* wants to do some mischief, get some AGPL'ed code into the source for [Facebook.com](http://Facebook.com) or TikTok or Twitter, keep the receipts, and tell the Free Software Foundation that you've done it. I don't believe for a second that they'd actually win, but I'd like to see Stallman's eyes light up at the idea of taking Mark Zuckerberg to court.

Over the last 20 years, though, the shift has been away from licenses like the GPL and towards what are known as permissive licenses. The most famous examples here are the Apache license, the Berkeley Systems Distribution, or BSD, license, and the MIT license. 

Now: I am not a lawyer, and I am not an expert on licensing. If you rely on anything you found in this talk as the basis for any kind of important decision, and you don't hire a lawyer to check it first, you're an idiot. Understood? Splendid.

The MIT license - which, yep, is named after the same Massachusetts Institute of Technology where Stallman had his laser printer incident - is only three paragraphs long, and it basically says : "this code is ours, we own the copyright, you can do just about anything you like with this code, except you can't remove our copyright notice from it, and you can't sue us if it doesn't work." The BSD license Berkeley Systems Distribution license says almost exactly the same thing. The Apache license is fundamentally the same idea, but it's considerably longer, and has far more specific legal wording designed to protect anybody who uses or modifies the software from potential legal disputes regarding patents.

The vast majority of open source projects today are published under one of these licenses. .NET, Ruby on Rails, nodeJS, angular and react are all published under the MIT license; Kubernetes, Android, and ImageMagick are published under the Apache license, along with just about everything governed by the Apache Foundation - Lucene, Maven, Flink, Kafka, Tomcat, and the Apache HTTP web server itself.

Now, here's the thing I think a lot of folks don't understand about these kinds of permissive licenses. They don't confer any obligations or restrictions on anybody, other than the very specific requirement that you've got to preserve the copyright and the license - and so while these licenses grant a huge amount of freedom, they don't create any legal obligation to preserve that freedom in subsequent or derivative versions.

I believe that people who publish software under the GPL have at least some sort of common philosophy - certainly more than the people who publish software under the Apache or MIT licences. About a decade ago, Microsoft took the unprecedented step of releasing .NET Core under the MIT license - but the vast majority of the contributors to the dotnet codebase are salaried employees who work for Microsoft. Folks like David Fowler, Kathleen Dollard, Don Syme - they have jobs. And Microsoft is a for-profit corporation which has a legal obligation to its shareholders to make as much money as possible, and so at some point I'm assuming somebody has sat down with a bunch of lawyers and a bunch of spreadsheets and decided that open sourcing .NET is the best way to make money - probably by betting the farm on Microsoft Azure, looking at every single possible reason that a company might decide NOT to run on Azure, and systematically eliminating those reasons. Personally, I now pay Microsoft a few hundred dollars a month, and almost all of that is on the Linux virtual machines in Azure that host my web apps... and I would *love* to go back to 1998 and tell the open source folks that before too long Microsoft would be selling Linux, just to see the looks on their faces.

Thing is: most of us aren't Microsoft. and there was this lovely idea floating around for a long while that, hey, let's all give our code away for free, and then people can look at the code, and use it, and see how amazingly wonderfully good it is, and then they'll hire us! Or they'll pay for a support contract, or they'll hire us to provide some training, or they'll buy a corporate license just because they're honest, decent folk who want to do the right thing.

Didn't quite work out that way, did it? The world we live in is full of Sammy Squirrel developers trying to stockpile enough acorns for the winter while Jeff the Raccoon flies past in his solid gold helicopter that he made by selling free software. Of course that's an extreme example - but it's a scenario that has happened often enough that we really need to ask ourselves what's going on here.

Within the last few years, we've seen a bunch of projects switch from permissive licenses to some sort of dual licensing model: MongoDB, ImageSharp, Docker, Terraform, Unity, and most recently Redis. Redis - short for REmote DIctionary Server - is a hugely popular in-memory cache database. It's been around for fifteen years, it's written in C, it's blisteringly fast, and until March this year was published under the Berkeley Systems Distribution - BSD - license, a permissive license similar to MIT: you can do anything you like with this code except claim that you wrote it. 

In March, Redis announced that they were switching their licenses. Future versions would no longer be distributed under the BSD license, and Redis went so far as to explicitly state that "cloud service providers hosting Redis offerings will no longer be permitted to use the source code of Redis free of charge" - and, sure enough, the woodland folk didn't like that one bit. Within days, a new community project, Valkey, had sprung up based around a fork of the latest BSD license of the Redis codebase. Microsoft announced Garnet, a new key/value store which is protocol compatible with existing Redis clients.

I have no idea what the future looks like for projects like Redis and Terraform. I strongly suspect that the open source projects started in response to those license changes - Valkey for Redis, OpenTofu for Terraform - will do well for a year or two, and then they'll go through the same reckoning as the projects which spawned them: success means more users, more users means more bug reports and feature requests, and unless lots of users also means lots of money, sustainability becomes a problem.

Switching to hybrid licensing isn't a new idea, though. There's a .NET library called ServiceStack, which I used to work with a lot: about ten years ago, ServiceStack was streets ahead of the rest of the .NET ecosystem when it came to building web services and REST APIs. Then in 2013, ServiceStack announced that their next release, 4.0, would switch from a BSD license to a dual licensing model. ServiceStack's was created by a guy called Demis Bellot, who was working as a developer at StackExchange; he said at the time it was "sink or swim" for ServiceStack: either he had to figure out a way to make it pay the bills so he could quit his day job, or he had to shut the project down.

And, yes, that's why I stopped using it. Going from free-as-in-beer to a thousand dollars per developer turned it into an argument I couldn't win: the company I was working for didn't actually make any money from APIs - not directly, anyway - and so we switched to a different framework instead of paying for ServiceStack.

Some of ServiceStack's users switched to other platforms. Some paid for licenses. Some decided to stick to the forked the last BSD version of the codebase and created a new project called NServiceKit, which made a big song and dance about how important it was that it didn't cost any money.

When I was researching this talk, I emailed Demis to ask: it's been ten years: how's it all going? Here's a few quotes from his response:

"I've been able to work full time on ServiceStack ever since leaving StackExchange. A decade of development later, the ServiceStack software itself has greatly improved and is much more capable than what was possible as a side OSS project."

"I was willing to take a significant pay cut to be able to work on my own projects so was pleasantly surprised when it ended up making more money than any job I had prior."

"ServiceStack has allowed our family to be financially independent and given me the freedom to work on whichever features I want."

I don't know about you folks, but financial independence and the freedom to work on whichever features I want sounds to me like a pretty good deal. 

ServiceStack is on version 8 now, and has been shipping new releases and features pretty steadily since they switched licenses. And what happened to NServiceKit? For a while, it looked like it might get some traction... but after about a year, it kinda fizzled out. The project is still up on GitHub: the last commit was 9 years ago, and the README still talks about joining their Google+ Community.. you remember Google+, right? And if we look at the package download stats on NuGet: ServiceStack's tracking at around 12 million downloads, NServiceKit's had less than 250,000.

So, in the case of ServiceStack at least, free software works a lot better when you can get people to pay for it.

And, of course, our friend Wilbur the Weasel wasn't a weasel at all... it was a person, or maybe a group of people, calling themselves Jia Tan, who came incredibly close to smuggling a security backdoor into several major Linux distributions. The project in question was a Linux compression library called xz - or xz if you're speaking American; xz is used in several key parts of Linux, including the openssh server used to provide remote access to... just about every Linux machine on the planet. You know what sort of well-funded, well-resourced development team was responsible for this vital piece of our society's digital infrastructure? That's right! One person, a guy called Lasse Collin, who maintained it in his spare time for no money, with occasional contributions from people like Jia Tan.

So in June 2022, when people on the xz-devel mailing list start hassling Lasse for being too slow to merge patches, it's no wonder he gratefully accepts Jia Tan's offer to become a co-maintainer. Nearly two years later, a completely random stroke of luck leads Andreas Freund, a developer working at Microsoft, to discover that Jia Tan has managed to implant an extremely serious security backdoor into the binary distributions of xz... the vulnerability itself was an incredibly sophisticated series of patches and changes, all designed to avoid detection, but the access required to make those changes in the first place was obtained by social engineering - and it was that pressure, one underfunded, overworked person feeling like they were responsible for such a critical piece of infrastructure, which made them vulnerable to the social engineering attack in the first place. 

Software works better when the people who create it aren't worrying about paying their bills. Most of the developers I know - and, I suspect, most of the people in this room - if money wasn't a factor, they'd find interesting problems to work on, and they would create really good solutions to those problems. But writing good software takes time, and time is money, and that brings us right back to the gritty heart of the problem: if you've already given something away for free, it is incredibly difficult to turn around charge for it afterwards. You'll lose a lot of users in the process - some because they legitimately have no money, some because they feel like you cheated them, some because actually it turns out whatever business they were running was only profitable because your generosity was bigger than their profit margins. You'll get a lot of negative reactions and bad noise, and so you end up here: you did a nice thing, you shared it with the world, other people used it to get rich, and now everybody hates you.

Now, I'm going to say this, and I'm going to say it very loud, and I want everybody here to think about it and write it down and retweet it, and I want you to print this out and stick it on the back of your bathroom door so you see it every time you're on the can, and I want it to be the first thing you think about when you wake up in the morning and the last thing you think about when you go to sleep at night:

PEOPLE WHO SHARE THEIR SOURCE CODE DO NOT OWE YOU ANYTHING.

If you make the decision to build a project, a product or a business on free software, you get the code, and a guarantee that nobody can turn around afterwards and stop you from using it. All you get is the freedom to decide your own future. You are not entitled to support. You are not entitled to patches. You are not entitled to security updates. You are not entitled to a free upgrade to the next version, you should not even rely on the fact that the code will still be online tomorrow. If any of those things is important to you, you should be prepared to pay for them - whether you buy a support contract from the developers, or hire somebody else to maintain your own copy of that code.

All you get is the code, and the guarantee that they won't stop you. And it astonishes me that for a lot of people, that's not enough. I use Adobe Creative Suite a *lot*. I don't have the code. I'll never have the code. I have to pay them fifty bucks a month or that software will stop working. If I find a bug, I get to... file a support request and wait a week for somebody to tell me they don't care. If Adobe turns around tomorrow and says Creative Cloud is now five hundred dollars a month... I can either pay it, or lose the ability to open my own projects. And if Adobe goes bankrupt and their authentication servers shut down?  Well, now I've got ten years' worth of Premiere and After Effects video project files that I can't even open, let alone create any new ones. And people like Richard Stallman are out there going "well that's your own fault for not using free software"... folks, Blender and The GIMP are not going to replace Adobe Creative Suite any time soon. Not even close. And let's not even think about the fact that Blender and the GIMP sounds like a pilot for an really, really bad television show.

I love the ethos behind the Free Software Foundation. I love that the GNU Public License exists, and that something as powerful as Linux exists in the world thanks to that license, and that nobody can ever take that away. But there is obviously a huge gap between Linux and Adobe, and what we've been seeing since the 1990s, and we're still seeing today, is an industry trying to figure out the most sustainable way to bridge that gap. It seems to me like open source worked great when interest rates were low and shareholders were happy and there was free money sloshing around everywhere... and now everybody's under pressure, whether you're the CEO of a multinational dealing with your shareholders, or a solo developer standing in a grocery store wondering when the heck breakfast cereal became so damn expensive, and so we're all trying to work out the same thing: when there's money on the table, how can I make sure I get my fair share?

And on that note, I want to wrap up this talk today by giving you all something to think about, to take away and chew over in your brains and see where it leads you.

Think about music for a moment. We've seen a transition from vinyl and CDs, to illegal MP3s on services like Napster and Limewire, to legitimate downloads like the iTunes store, to streaming platforms like Spotify and Google Music. Spotify has 250 million paying subscribers - and yes, Spotify is a spectacularly punitive model that pays artists an absolute pittance, but guess what? Sustainable open source is so broken that even Spotify would be an improvement on where we are now.

You know what those subscribers are paying for? Convenience. Ten bucks a month so that when they want a thing, they can have it. Licensing and ownership doesn't even come into it. Very few people stop to worry about that any more: they just want THE THING NOW.

You know why the cloud works? Convenience. It's like Spotify for IT infrastructure. You want to hear the new Taylor Swift album right now, except it's not Tay, it's a 64-core PostgreSQL cluster... the cloud got your back, baby. And you never actually *own* the thing; it's not like when you're finished using your 64-core PostgreSQL cluster you can sell it on eBay. But convenience rules, and companies love it.

Has anybody ever tried to get a big company to pay for anything? Any of you folks out there ever tried to get your employers to sponsor an open source project? It's an absolute nightmare, isn't it? And if you're the project maintainer, trying to persuade somebody to give you a thousand bucks for software that they think they already own... well, that's even worse.

But let me ask you another question: think about your company's Azure bill this month? Or AWS, or Google Cloud, or GitHub? Do you know what you actually paid for? Probably not - and, yes, there's a good chance a chunk of it is paying for free software because it's easier than running it yourself. But imagine a new line item appears on next months' bill: software packaging and delivery: ten dollars. Is your company going to quibble that? Or are they just going to go "welp, I guess that's a thing we do now." What if it was a hundred? What if it was a thousand dollars a month? 

Imagine for a second that NuGet wasn't necessarily. Let's start NuGet Premium. There's a free quota, so casual users - individuals, hobbyists, students - they can just use it. But if your company is using CircleCI, or Azure DevOps, or GitHub Actions, to run a dozen builds a day? You're going to blow through the free tier pretty quick... and then you've got a choice.

You can download the source code from, GitHub, compile it yourself, package it... but, y'know, *effort*.

You can set up a paid account. Pay monthly, credit card, just like folks do for Spotify and Netflix.

Or... we'll stick it on your company's cloud bill. Yes, this means coordinating with GitHub, and Google, and Amazon, and Azure, and there will be meetings, and contracts... but if you wanna change the world, you need to solve the hard problems. Keep track of whatever metadata Github and Amazon need to pass those costs on to their own customers, send them a big fat bill every month - I'm not much of an entrepreneur but I have heard that sending big invoices regularly to customers who have a lot of money is a good way to run a business - and if they want to add twenty per cent to make it worth their while? Fine. Don't care.

And then: pay the package authors. Now, we're not selling software here - any more than Spotify is selling music. We're selling convenience, and since your code forms part of that service, we'll give you your cut.

How much?

OK, let's work out some numbers.

NuGet doesn't publish total download figures, but they do publish download figures for their 100 most popular packages, so if we fit a curve to those, we can use to estimate the total download numbers. At the start of May there were about 650,000 packages on NuGet... y'all remember doing definite integrals in high school calculus? Fit a curve to this, integrate the curve between 1 and 650,000, gives us about hundred billion downloads a month. That's 12 NuGet package downloads a month for every human being on this planet... remember that next time somebody on HackerNews saying nobody uses .NET any more.

Next question: how many users are we talking about? Again, there aren't published figures for this so we're going to have to estimate this based on the available data. newtonsoft.json gets downloaded about 28 million times per week. Between bootstrapping new projects and running CI builds, I probably pull Newtonsoft down about ten times in a given week, so in the absence of any data to the contrary, let's assume I'm typical, so divide the download numbers by ten: 2.8 million users.

So, first costing model: if we wanted to pay as much per download as Spotify pays per stream - actually, let's go overboard. Let's pay half a cent, 'cos it makes the numbers easier.

Half a cent per download is five hundred million dollars a month. Divide that equally between our 2.8 million active users: 178 dollars per user per month.

OK, that's a lot more expensive than Spotify. Let's improve our revenue model a bit.

First: let's restrict it to packages which are actually being actively developed. Say packages which have had at least one release in the last year. That brings the total from 650,000 down to just over 100,000 packages, and integrating our download curve over that interval from 1 to 100000 means we're looking at 40 billion downloads. Yes - any of you folks out there who wrangle statistics: I just made the assumption that the 100000 most actively maintained packages roughly correlates to the 100000 most downloaded packages. I think that's a fair assumption for this kind of model.

So if we wanted to pay half a cent per download, 40 billion downloads a month, we'd need two hundred million dollars a month: we'd need to charge every single person who uses Wasilisk about 70 dollars a month. Which is clearly not going to work.

OK, let set up three pricing plans. Basic is fifteen bucks a month, indie is a 75, enterprise is 500. Assume half our users are on the free tier, 10% are indie, 1% are enterprise, the rest are basic. 

Our revenue pot is now 60 million dollars a month; across 40 billion downloads, we're down to 0.15 cents per download. Which is actually quite a useful number, because NuGet publishes download statistics for the last six weeks, so if you wanna know how much a package would make? Look at the package's page on NuGet: every thousand downloads there is a dollar per month.

Castle.Core is making about 30,000 bucks a month, Automapper that's 22 grand a month, FluentValidation's turning over about 20,000 dollars. ImageSharp? About five thousand dollars a month.

Now, folks, this isn't a business plan. It might be fun to turn it into one - but right now, this is an experiment. There are all kinds of complications and questions about sharing revenue in projects with multiple contributors. If I submit a bug fix to your project, should I get royalties for it? But I wanted to see if the numbers were in the right sort of ballpark - and I think they are. 

The most successful open source projects here are the kind of numbers people quit their day jobs for - or the kind of numbers that justify hiring somebody to help out with support and maintenance. Midfield, they're the kind of numbers that make it easier to justify spending time on your side project, or maybe going down to a four-day-week for a while so you've got more time to work on the next version. And in the long tail, there's going to be a whole lot of folks whose hobby project pays for a new laptop every couple of years.

But remember: all we're talking about here is paying for convenience. Folks who subscribe to NuGet Pro don't own the software, just like paying for Disney+ doesn't mean I own Star Wars. It's a delivery service for code which is provided to you under whatever license the authors consider appropriate, whether that's a paid license, a permissive open source license, the GPL, or it's completely in the public domain. We're doing the 2024 equivalent of charging ten bucks for a Red Hat Linux CD-ROM because downloading it over dialup is a pain in the ass.

Of course, this is never going to happen. NuGet changing to a premium service? The woodland folk would fucking riot. Same with npm, Ruby Gems, PIP... every mainstream platform has a free-as-in-beer package management system and I suspect any attempt to make those paid would result in a lot of bad noise, a spectacularly optimistic attempt to fork it, and an inevitable u-turn a month later.

But: within the next year or two, something very interesting is going to happen: WASI. The Web Assembly Systems Interface is a standardised set of APIs for composing software written in different languages - if anybody saw Steve Sanderson's talk at NDC London in January? This could be a game-changer for the whole concept of interoperable software. You want to build an app in Go that uses a pricing engine built in Haskell and the Razor view engine from .NET? WASI will let you do that.

Which means there will, inevitably, be some sort of online repository of WASI packages: like NuGet, or Ruby Gems, or Maven. The potential market for this platform is vast, because those packages will be genuinely cross-platform: we could have one, single library for decoding JPEG files, and it doesn't matter if you're working in C# or JavaScript or Rust: if you need to decode a JPEG, that's the library you use.

So before our entire industry rushes headlong into another round of YAY FREE SOFTWARE IS GOING TO SAVE THE WORLD and ends up wondering why Jeff's flying around in a solid gold helicopter and everybody's burned out and exhausted... maybe there's another way we can do this. 

Because you know what real freedom is?

It's waking up on a Saturday knowing that you can take the weekend off and not feel guilty about it. It's knowing that your boss isn't gonna WhatsApp you about production issues, and your users' details aren't going to end up for sale on the darkweb, and that you've got enough money coming in to pay the rent, and if you wanna take your kids to the beach or write songs with your band or just spend the entire day on the sofa watching Netflix, that's OK.

Free beer and free speech is all very well, but free weekends? 

That's something worth fighting for.

Thank you.